---
title: "Why TDD simply doesn't work"
description: "In this post I discuss my introduction to TDD. My pitfalls, my mindset, my challenges and my discoveries."
date: 2022-03-02T12:59:47+12:00
draft: true
author: "Tom van Dinther"
prism_lineno: false
tags: ["TDD", "BDD", concepts"]
categories: ["TDD"]
series: ["TDD"]
comments: true
bookcase_cover_src: "posts/docker-mongo.png"
bookcase_cover_src_dark: "posts/docker-mongo.png"
---

I first heard about test-driven development (TDD) in a university lecture about software practices. It was given its own lecture in the riveting week of lectures covering software testing. The room was dead and the air was dry, a place too inhospitable for excitement and energy about software testing. Things were getting theoretical and like many computer science students, I was thinking only about when and what my next meal was going to be. The lecture was paired with exercises whereby we were given some completed python tests and some implementation stubs. Our task was to satisfy the tests. This was my first experience with test-driven development and it was *dry*, ironically because it felt like the lecturer was repeating themselves.

Fast-forward to my first internship and I was given the opportunity to learn and develop my skills as a software developer. Unlike some internships, I wasn't put straight to work breaking some production code. I was given guidance and mentorship to hone my craft in areas of object-oriented programming, learning about SOLID principles and of-course, TDD. Given my previous experiences with TDD I was not particularly thrilled with the idea, but I was in a great learning environment and always willing to give something another shot so I took it in my stride.

My mentor gave me the low-down on TDD. They told me about the 3 steps of test-driven development: red, write tests for code that does not yet pass the test (or even exist); green, write the implementations so that the tests are satisfied; and refactor, tidy up the code so that it resembles something clean and coherent. Seemed simple enough, so they got me started on a simple exercise to flex my TDD muscles. The exercise was nicely laid out with step-by-step increments in the code complexity with each TDD cycle improving on the next. It seemed to make a lot of sense and it was working to get a piece of code slowly built up into something robust. The magic of TDD was starting to show!

Once I had completed the TDD exercise I moved on to writing Conway's Game of Life. My mentor encouraged me to practice what I had learned of TDD in this new venture. So I did. From an empty project I spun up a test class, imported the test-suite and started writing the first test case. My cursor blinked idly in the IDE for several minutes. What on earth am I trying to test for, where do I even begin? See, up until this point I had been writing programs by diving in head first and fleshing things out from starting by printing "Hello World!" and refactoring until I ended up with a working program. This does not cut it for TDD, my approach needed to be more deliberate. In stubborness and frustrated by my lack of progress I ditched my test class and started writing the program - without the tests.

The next part of my internship featured working on a web API to access data in a SQL database. As before, I was instructed to use TDD. As this time I was working with a team of interns, I felt more obliged to stick to the process. We were all quite new to software testing and we came across all kinds of difficulties in setting up our tests and creating logical assertions. I blamed these frustrations on TDD. The absurdity of testing code that didn't even exist yet was obviously the problem. Writing the tests after having something to test clearly makes much more sense.

Fast-forward once again and I am about to start a job at the company that gave me the internship. Expecting TDD to become a large part of my experience at the company I begin to arm myself with the knowledge to tackle it. I open Google and search "arguments against TDD". Now some of my fellow Googlers out there may be aware of a confirmation bias in search results. That queries should be as neutral as possible to present you with the right information. In some kind of miracle, my first page of results were full of positive articles about TDD. I thought wow, the TDD fellowship are extremely devout. As it will come to be, I had just not yet seen the initial glimmer of light.

The first result I clicked on was a YouTube video titled "TDD vs. BDD". This is the one, it will tell me whats wrong with TDD and present me with something better. What actually became me was perhaps the best explanation of TDD I had ever heard. Not only did I finally understand *why* TDD was worth pursuing but I also learnt about the restrictions in the mindset of TDD and its pitfalls. This is where *BDD* comes into the equation. BDD stands for behaviour-driven development. It was created as a way to present the core elements of TDD in a context that just *made sense*. BDD *is* TDD but it is also so much more.

This was it, I had my epiphany. I was excited to actually do TDD. I started my new job and immediately got dirty with TDD and with this new outlook the difference was night and day. My code suddenly had better levels of coupling, tests were easier to write, my confidence in the robustness of my program was there. No longer did I have the extremely frustrating hours of bug hunting, the tests revealed all. The tests also provided convenient entry points for debugging and conditional breakpoints on failing test-cases made finding logical errors so much easier than before.

The reason I write this post is to try to give a perspective on how some junior developers feel about TDD and how simply doing TDD is not enough to see the benefits. I believe that there are some prerequisites to benefiting from TDD and that without these fundamentals, TDD becomes a muddy pit of despair. For example, when I was first introduced to TDD, I did not have a good grasp on how to do abstraction, or how to use interfaces well, or how to really apply the SOLID principles. In my opinion, the most important principle to have a handle on is the single responsibility principle. If your class does too much, testing it becomes extremely difficult. Interface segregation and dependency inversion principles become very important when you begin mocking dependencies too.

This post does not divulge many details about the ideas that were convyed to me to change my perspective, but I wish to go into greater detail about that in another post. In this post I simply wanted to describe my journey and maybe you can find some similarities in yours. So with that said, my advice to anybody starting their TDD journey is to make sure that you have the SOLID principles etched into your being, it will make the testing so much easier. Without the unnecessary friction, thinking about code as tests first becomes a task simpler than writing good code first. Write *simple* tests, pass with *SOLID* code.